The Chico Youth Court (CYC), a program of the North Valley Community Foundation, provides
Juvenile First Offender Diversion Services to the Chico community. Through cooperation with Chico
Unified School District, law enforcement and the juvenile probation department, CYC works directly
with juveniles using Restorative Justice as an early intervention. All participants in Youth Court,
except the judicial officer and program staff, are under the age of 18. CYC’s objective is to provide a
second chance to juveniles, help them understand the impact of their actions, and through
educational programs, help them take accountability for their behaviors. Participants who
successfully complete Youth Court will have their criminal charges dropped and will assist other teens
through the Youth Court process. Educational coursework, including life skills, alcohol/drug
education, anger management and criminality are some of the classes participants may be required
to complete. Other agreements may include community service, restitution and jury duty.
Mission: To promote juvenile accountability through the Youth Court process.
Vision: To utilize a Youth Court process to divert first offenders from the juvenile justice system.
Core Values: To educate the community and stakeholders on the merits of all dispute resolution, that
includes personal accountability, respect, community commitment and that all people deserve a
second chance.

Goal: To divert eligible juvenile first offenders from the justice system and provide them with the tools
necessary to prevent recidivism.

• To provide educational services to participants of the CYC program and to address areas of need,
i.e., alcohol/drug, anger management, criminality, and others

• Reduce suspensions and expulsions and assist schools in maintaining their ADA (AB1729).
• Give a voice to all affected persons and institutions
• Afford the offender the opportunity to address the harm they have caused.
• Reduce demand on police and judicial resources.
• Expand the use of alternative dispute resolution options to benefit the community.
